Add getting started guide for unmanaged cluster (#2820)
vmware-tanzu/community-edition: docs/site/content/docs/latest/ref-unmanaged-cluster.md

# Unmanaged Clusters Reference

This is the reference documentation for the `unmanaged-cluster` plugin. If
you're trying to use unmanaged clusters for the first time, see

> [Getting Started with Unmanaged Clusters](/docs/latest/getting-started-unmanaged/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Getting Started with Unmanaged Clusters](getting-started-unmanaged/.
```

## Command aliases

As a Tanzu CLI plugin, unmanaged clusters can be interacted with using `tanzu
unmanaged-cluster`. `uc`, `um`, and `unmanaged` are all valid aliases for the
command. This means the following commands equate to the same:

* `tanzu unmanaged-cluster create hello`
* `tanzu uc create hello`
* `tanzu um create hello`
* `tanzu unmanaged create hello`

## Creating clusters

`create` is used to create a new cluster. By default, it:

1. Installs a cluster using `kind`.
1. Installs `kapp-controller`.
1. Installs a core package repository.
1. Installs a user-managed package repository.
1. Installs a CNI package.
    * defaults to `antrea`.
1. Sets your kubeconfig context to the newly created cluster.

> To create a cluster named `hello`, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a cluster named, run:
```

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster create ${CLUSTER_NAME}
```

## Listing clusters

`list` or `ls` is used to list all known clusters. To list known clusters, run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster list
```

## Deleting clusters

`delete` or `rm` is used to delete a cluster. It will:

1. Attempt to delete the cluster based on the provider.
    * by default, clusters use `kind`, this will delete the `kind` cluster.
1. Attempt to remove the cluster's directory.
    * located at `~/.config/tanzu/tkg/unmanaged/${CLUSTER_NAME}`.

To delete a cluster, run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster delete ${CLUSTER_NAME}
```

## Custom configuration

> `unamanaged-cluster` takes configuration from the multiple sources in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`unmanaged-cluster` takes configuration from the multiple sources in the
```

following order:

> 1. (lowest precedence)

Reviewer: Missing content?

Author: yup, still need to write it :+1:

1. Create a `minikube` cluster.

    ```sh
    $ minikube start

    * minikube v1.24.0 on Arch rolling
    * Automatically selected the docker driver. Other choices: kvm2, ssh
    * Starting control plane node minikube in cluster minikube
    * Pulling base image ...

    * Preparing Kubernetes v1.22.3 on Docker 20.10.8 ...
      - Generating certificates and keys ...
      - Booting up control plane ...
      - Configuring RBAC rules ...
    * Verifying Kubernetes components...
      - Using image gcr.io/k8s-minikube/storage-provisioner:v5
    * Enabled addons: storage-provisioner, default-storageclass
    * Done! kubectl is now configured to use "minikube" cluster and "default" namespace by default
    ```

1. Install the unmanaged cluster components

    ```sh
    tanzu unmanaged-cluster create -e ~/.kube/config --cni=none
    ```

    * `~/.kube/config` is the location of the kubeconfig used to access the
      `minikube` cluster.
    * `--cni=none` is set since `minikube` already sets up a network for pods.

1. Now you can use the `tanzu` CLI to interact with the cluster.

    ```sh
    tanzu package list -A
    ```

> ## Disable CNI installation

Reviewer: Missing content?

Author: yup, still need to write it :+1:

> ## Customize the distribution

Reviewer: Missing content?

## Limitations

This section details known limitations of unmanaged clusters.

### Can't Upgrade Kubernetes

> By design, `unmanaged-clusters` do not lifecycle-manage Kubernetes. These
> clusters are not meant to be long-running with real workloads. To change
> Kubernetes versions a cluster should be deleted with a new cluster, featuring a
> different configuration, to be created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By design, `unmanaged-clusters` do not lifecycle-manage Kubernetes. They are not meant to be long-running with real workloads. To change Kubernetes versions, delete the existing cluster and create a new cluster with a different configuration.
```

> # Unmanaged Clusters Reference

Author: TODO(@joshrosso): Add content in for switching contexts between clusters.

Author: going to keep this out of the docs until we implement a context-switch capability.

> This is the reference documentation for the `unmanaged-cluster` plugin. If
> you're trying to use unmanaged clusters for the first time, see
> [Getting Started with Unmanaged Clusters](getting-started-unmanaged/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the reference documentation for the `unmanaged-cluster` plugin. If
this is your first time deploying an unmanaged cluster, see
[Getting Started with Unmanaged Clusters](getting-started-unmanaged/).
```

As a Tanzu CLI plugin, unmanaged clusters can be interacted with using `tanzu
unmanaged-cluster`. `uc`, `um`, and `unmanaged` are all valid aliases for the
command. This means the following commands equate to the same:

* `tanzu unmanaged-cluster create hello`
* `tanzu uc create hello`
* `tanzu um create hello`
* `tanzu unmanaged create hello`

## Creating clusters

`create` is used to create a new cluster. By default, it:

1. Installs a cluster using `kind`.
1. Installs `kapp-controller`.
1. Installs a core package repository.
1. Installs a user-managed package repository.
1. Installs a CNI package.
    * defaults to `antrea`.
1. Sets your kubeconfig context to the newly created cluster.

To create a cluster, run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster create ${CLUSTER_NAME}
```

## Listing clusters

`list` or `ls` is used to list all known clusters. To list known clusters, run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster list
```

## Deleting clusters

`delete` or `rm` is used to delete a cluster. It will:

1. Attempt to delete the cluster based on the provider.
    * by default, clusters use `kind`, this will delete the `kind` cluster.
1. Attempt to remove the cluster's directory.

>     * located at `~/.config/tanzu/tkg/unmanaged/${CLUSTER_NAME}`.

Reviewer 2: very small nit: since this is a _directory_ should this be:

```diff
+ ~/.config/tanzu/tkg/unmanaged/${CLUSTER_NAME}/
- ~/.config/tanzu/tkg/unmanaged/${CLUSTER_NAME}
```

To delete a cluster, run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster delete ${CLUSTER_NAME}
```

## Custom configuration

> `unmanaged-cluster` takes configuration from the multiple sources in the

Author: note: add details on how to configure/set configuration as a whole.

1. Create a `minikube` cluster.

    ```sh
    $ minikube start

    * minikube v1.24.0 on Arch rolling
    * Automatically selected the docker driver. Other choices: kvm2, ssh
    * Starting control plane node minikube in cluster minikube
    * Pulling base image ...

    * Preparing Kubernetes v1.22.3 on Docker 20.10.8 ...
      - Generating certificates and keys ...
      - Booting up control plane ...
      - Configuring RBAC rules ...
    * Verifying Kubernetes components...
      - Using image gcr.io/k8s-minikube/storage-provisioner:v5
    * Enabled addons: storage-provisioner, default-storageclass
    * Done! kubectl is now configured to use "minikube" cluster and "default" namespace by default
    ```

1. Install the unmanaged cluster components

    ```sh
    tanzu unmanaged-cluster create -e ~/.kube/config --cni=none
    ```

    * `~/.kube/config` is the location of the kubeconfig used to access the
      `minikube` cluster.
    * `--cni=none` is set since `minikube` already sets up a network for pods.

1. Now you can use the `tanzu` CLI to interact with the cluster.

    ```sh
    tanzu package list -A
    ```

> ## Disable CNI installation

Author: Gonna keep these as upper level for the time being, I don't feel like they are sub topics.

To create a cluster **without** a CNI installed, run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster create --cni=none
```

This will skip CNI installation and prompt the following during the CNI
installation step.

```txt
🌐 Installing CNI
   No CNI installed: CNI was set to none.
```

The cluster creation will complete successfully. After that, you are free to
install a CNI into the cluster.

> ## Customize the distribution

Author: Gonna keep these as upper level for the time being, I don't feel like they are sub topics.

> Unmanaged clusters gather details on how to create a cluster using a Tanzu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unmanaged clusters gather details on how to create a cluster from a Tanzu
```

Kubernetes Release (TKr) file. For each release of unmanaged clusters, a

> [default TKR is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[default TKr is
```

set](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/blob/d0a8622e164c1e345686470b7bcce0c6be9c58f5/cli/cmd/plugin/unmanaged-cluster/tkr/tkr.go#L14-L16).

> When creating clusters, you can point to a different TKR using the `--tkr` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating clusters, you can point to a different TKr using the `--tkr` flag.
```

> When creating clusters, you can point to a different TKR using the `--tkr` flag.
> The TCE project keeps TKRs for unmanaged clusters at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When creating unmanaged clusters, you can point to a different TKr using the `--tkr` flag.
TKrs for unmanaged clusters are available here:
```

> The TCE project keeps TKRs for unmanaged clusters at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TCE project keeps TKrs for unmanaged clusters at
```

> `projects.registry.vmware.com/tce/tkr`. Using
> [imgpkg](https://carvel.dev/imgpkg), you can query available TKrs:
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`projects.registry.vmware.com/tce/tkr`. Query available TKrs using 
[imgpkg](https://carvel.dev/imgpkg), for example, 

```

```sh
$ imgpkg tag list -i projects.registry.vmware.com/tce/tkr
Tags

Name
sha256-2fd337282cf17357c6329f441dc970ec900145faef9e2ec6122f98fa75d529c3.imgpkg
sha256-33f63314fb72ead645715f6ac85128c0fe0fd380d14f0a79eddba3dd361b73dd.imgpkg
sha256-ac6566268e0f113a4b91bab870a34353685e886f97e248633bb2c2fcf6490dc8.imgpkg
v1.21.5
v1.21.5-1
v1.21.5-2
v1.21.5-3
v1.22.2
```

To create a cluster with an alternative TKR, you can run:

```sh
tanzu unmanaged-cluster create --tkr projects.registry.vmware.com/tce/tkr:v1.22.2
```

To customize a TKr, you can pull an existing one down using `imgpkg`:

```sh
$ imgpkg pull -i projects.registry.vmware.com/tce/tkr:v1.22.2 -o tkr
Pulling image 'projects.registry.vmware.com/tce/tkr@sha256:7c1a241dc57fe94f02be4dd6d7e4b29f159415417164abc4b5ab6bb10cf4cbaa'
Extracting layer 'sha256:e17e901811682a2c8c91c8865f3344a21fdf8f83f012de167c15d2ab06cc494a' (1/1)

Succeeded
```

> You can then edit the above TKR in the `tkr/tkr-bom-v1.22.2.yaml`. After

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can then edit the above TKr in the `tkr/tkr-bom-v1.22.2.yaml`. After
```
